## History of Zanzibar

Zanzibar has lured traders, adventurers, plunderers and explorers to its shores for centuries. A huge collection of cultures have visited at some point, including the Assyrians, Sumerians, Egyptians, Phoenicians, Indians, Chinese, Persians, Portuguese, Omani Arabs, and the Dutch and English. Two of these groups, the Shirazi Persians and the Omani Arabs, stayed to settle and rule Zanzibar. Through this influence, Zanzibar has become predominantly Islamic with 97% of the population holding Islamic faith. The remaining 3% is made up of Christians, Hindus, and Sikhs. The earliest visitors to Zanzibar were Arab traders who were said to have arrived in the 8th century. The earliest building that remains in Zanzibar is the mosque at Kizimkazi, which dates from 1107 AD and is a popular tourist destination.

For centuries, the Arabs sailed with the monsoon winds from Oman to trade in primarily ivory, slaves, and spices. The two main islands, Unguja (sometimes called Zanzibar Island) and the isle of Pemba, provided an ideal base for the Omani Arabs. This was because the small size of the Islands made them easy to defend. In 1832, Sultan Seyyid of the Busaid dynasty from Oman, moved his kingdom from Muscat to Zanzibar due to its ease of defense. The Sultan and his descendants ruled Zanzibar for over 130 years, where most of the wealth laid in the hands of the landowners in the Arab community. They kept to themselves, and generally did not intermarry with the Africans.

The Shirazi Persians were a completely different case, they came from the Middle East to settle on the East African Coast. The story goes that in 975 AD, Abi Ben Sultan Hasan of Shiraz in Persia (now Iran), had a terrible nightmare of a rat devouring the foundations of his house. He took this as an omen that his community would soon be devastated. Others in the Shirazi court ridiculed the notion, but Sultan Hasan and his close connections obviously took it very seriously and decided to migrate. They set out in seven dhows (Arab vessels) into the Indian Ocean, but were caught in a huge storm and were separated from each other. This resulted in seven different settlements along the East African Coast, one of which was Zanzibar.

Widespread intermarriage between Shirazis and Africans gave rise to a coastal community with distinctive features. It was also responsible for the inception of a language derived in part from Arabic, which became known as Swahili. The name Swahili comes from the Arabic word sawahil, which means 'coast'. The Zanzibari descendants that resulted from this intermarriage were not greatly involved in the lucrative trading of slaves, spices, and ivory. Instead, they immersed themselves mainly in agriculture and fishing. The Shirazi that did not intermarry retained their identity as a separate group, two smaller communities were also established as a result. Indian traders arrived in connection with the spice and ivory trade, and quickly settled as shopkeepers, traders, and skilled artisans. The British became involved in missionary and trading activities in East Africa, and attempted to suppress the slave trade centred in Zanzibar.

Zanzibar was once one of Africa's most prosperous countries, primarily due to the bountiful resources that it produced. Among theses resources, the most important was the spices that it grew, which were greatly desired by the rest of the world. The wealth gained from the spice trade was unfortunately amplified by the slave trade, undeniably spices and the slave trade went hand-in-hand. Zanzibar's spice plantations depended on slave labor, and there still exist sad relics of this trade on the island.

During much of it's history, Zanzibar was also one of the most important ports in Africa, trading ships from Britain docked here before they moved on to other parts of Africa. The island is no longer incredibly prosperous from trade, but it has a wealth of historical monuments which commemorate the African, British, and Arab influences on Zanzibar. These places include Sultan's palaces, cathedrals, mosques, fortresses, and old colonial houses. Our spice tour is the ideal way to see the island's historic sites and spice plantations. There is also a sanctuary for the rare Zanzibar duiker and the red colobus monkey in the protected Jozani Forest, which is just twenty-five kilometers from the town. Many endangered animals find their homes in the protected sanctuaries found throughout Zanzibar.
